So, this talk is a little bit of an overview of some work that's been going on in the open
source ecosystem over the last decade, my thoughts about it, and give you some ideas
about where I think things are going.
But firstly, I'll tell you a little bit about my backgrounds.
Most people are familiar with Pandas, but I've been working on lots of projects over
the last 16 or 17 years.
I'll tell you about my new role back at Posit and what I'm doing there, why I work for Posit,
why you should pay more attention to Posit as a company, give you an overview of where
this whole concept of composable data systems came from, tell you about what's active and
what I think is exciting right now, and where I think things are headed, or at least where
I'm personally focusing my energy to help things move forward.
So, as Sean mentioned, my full-time job is I'm an architect at Posit, formerly RStudio.
I co-founded Voltron Data, just had a big week at GTC conference last week, I'll talk
a little bit about that.
I did just launch a venture fund, which I'll tell you about.
Many of you probably have my book, Python for Data Analysis, it's in its third edition,
it's now freely available on the internet, so if you go to westmckinney.com slash book,
you can read it for free.
It's also very helpful if you need to look it up and don't have it on you and you want
to look something up.
I've been working on a bunch of open source projects, I'm also helping out LanceDB, my
former co-founder Chong is here with some folks from LanceDB, also very excited about
what they're doing there.
Over the last several years, up until very recently, I was 100% focused on Voltron Data
and the mission of that company is unlocking the potential of GPU acceleration in large-scale
analytics workloads.
We also have built a large team to support Apache Aero development and offering partnership
to companies that are building on the Aero ecosystem, so we've created partnerships with
Meta and Snowflake and other companies, raised a lot of money, so very, very exciting.
I just launched a micro-venture fund, so micro refers to the size of the checks, so I have
some LPs, but I've been investing in data and data infrastructure companies for the
last five years and I wanted to be able to do more investing, in particular to invest
with a particular thesis around what we can do to help accelerate growth in companies
that are building on this new stack of composable open source technologies.
This was just a couple of weeks ago, I'm a speaker here, so I didn't have to buy a VC
ticket for this conference, maybe next year, but I am a part-time VC, not a full-time VC,
so my goal is to not invest as a full-time job, but I do enjoy helping founders and being
involved in startups.
Many of you maybe know Posit by its former name, RStudio, which is a 15-year-old company.
It's now 300 people, it's a remote-first company, so the headquarters is in Boston, but there
are people all over the world.
Its mission is building open source data science software for code-first developers, so it
stayed clear of building low-code tools for data science.
Also very passionate about technical communication, so JJ Allaire, who founded Posit, he goes
all the way back to ColdFusion.
He created ColdFusion in the 1990s, and so building tools to help with publishing websites
and creating communication for the internet has been a passion for 30 years and that continues
at Posit.
It is a certified B corporation, no plans to go public or to be acquired.
It's designing itself for long-term resiliency with the intent to be a 100-year company.
300 people is a lot of mouths to feed, so you might be wondering,
well, how does Posit make money with all this open-source software?
Their main business is making open-source work in the enterprise, and so that comes in a few
ways.
The workbench used to be known as RStudio Server.
They added support for JupyterLab, Jupyter Notebooks, VS Code, in addition to the RStudio
IDE that enables you to do development in a hosted environment, Connect, which allows
you to publish Streamlit, Dash, Shiny, all kinds of data applications, publish your Jupyter
Notebooks, Cordo documents.
A very helpful product if you need to get your work in the hands of the people you work
with.
There's also a package manager product, so there's a lot of stuff going on there.
I've actually been involved with this company for a long time.
I knew Hadley Wickham and the RStudio folks well before 2016, but we started working together
more actively in 2016 when we started the Arrow project.
In 2018, I formally partnered with them to create Ursa Labs to do full-time development
on Apache Arrow.
They helped me incubate Ursa Computing, which turned into Voltron Data.
After several years of working on that, I decided to come back to Posit to help them
with their journey to become a polyglot data science and computing company.
Going back to 2018, the way I described the reason why I wanted to work with Posit was
that Hadley and I think that the language wars are stupid.
We feel the enmity between the R and Python communities is counterproductive, and that
we are in the business of creating tools to make data analysis, make humans more productive
working with data, and so that we share a passion for the long-term vision of empowering
data scientists and creating a positive relationship with the open-source user communities.
Very excited to be involved with this company.
If you followed me back when I was doing Ursa Labs, we also had significant sponsorship
from a number of other companies that were essential to making Apache Arrow and this
whole composable data stack happen over the last six, seven, eight years.
All right, composable data systems.
Last year at VLDB, I collaborated with fine folks at Meta to write this paper called
The Composable Data Management System Manifesto.
It's a great paper.
I want to help you in this talk by presenting some of the key ideas from the paper and why
they matter.
I do recommend that you check out this paper.
I think it's really well written.
The Meta folks did most of the writing, but it's very well written and I think lays out
a really compelling vision for where things are going.
What is a composable data system?
The way that I think about this is that we are building systems based on open standards
and protocols.
We're designing for modularity, reuse, and interoperability with other systems that share
those common interfaces in open standards and protocols.
In particular, we're resisting this idea of vertical integration where every layer of
your system is bespoke and you build it yourself.
It's this homespun thing where you build everything top to bottom.
It does create more work in some ways because you have to deal with coordination and open
source diplomacy.
You have to think about moving along these different pieces that you share governance
and you share ownership with other developers and people who are working on different layers
of the stack.
The hope is that over time that each of the component pieces that we use to build these
systems become so much better, easier to use, faster, more interoperable, and that you end
up creating a solution that is a lot more future-proof and delivers better results over
time.
It's a little bit painful because you have to go through the painful growing pains of
creating these new systems and making them all work together as well as negotiating with
all of the open source developers that are involved in these projects.
The way that it was put in the words in the paper is that we envision by decomposing data
management systems into a more modular stack of reusable components, the development of
engines can be streamlined while reducing maintenance costs and ultimately providing
a more consistent user experience.
By clearly outlining APIs and encapsulating responsibilities, data management software
could more easily be adapted, for example, to leverage novel devices and accelerators
as the underlying hardware evolves.
That was one of the reasons why we founded Voltron Data.
We observed that it's hard for people to take advantage of GPUs to accelerate their systems.
We also saw that there's many new hardware companies creating new types of hardware.
We need to make a corresponding investment in the software layer to make it easier to
take advantage of new developments in hardware, whether that's faster computing, faster
networking, faster storage.
Ideally, from the standpoint of you as a user, you just want to be able to write Python code
and as the hardware improves, all your software gets faster and you don't have to think about
the messy details of, well, how do I take advantage of this bleeding edge development
in computing hardware?
The hope is that by relying on a modular stack that reuses execution engines, language front-ends,
the data systems can provide a more consistent experience and semantics to users from
transactional to analytic systems, stream processing to machine learning workloads.
That sounds very nice in principle.
One question people have had is, why is this happening now?
Why is it happening in the 2020s?
Why didn't this happen in the 2010s or even earlier?
It helps to go back and think about the generational eras of big data technology going back to the
original Google MapReduce paper in the mid-2000s.
The clone of Google MapReduce and Google File System as HDFS and Apache Hadoop,
that was the first release of Hadoop from Yahoo was in 2006.
The MapReduce paper popularized this idea of disaggregated storage and compute.
You have a big distributed file system, you have all of your data sets live as files in that file
system, and then you have a bunch of compute engines that can process on those files.
You process files in, the systems write files out back into that distributed file system.
But what this created was this collection of monolithic vertically integrated systems
that were part of the Hadoop ecosystem.
Just getting these components to a place where they were viable and you could use them to
productively work was hard enough.
Thinking about a hierarchy of needs thing, thinking about how we could modularize components
of those systems and reuse large pieces of software between those systems,
that was pie-in-the-sky thinking back in the late 2000s, early 2010s.
But there was a big shift in the 2010s where a particular large software vendor shifted from
selling proprietary vertically integrated software components to delivery of services in a cloud
environment.
That also led to an emergence of open source standards, file formats like Parquet,
as well as there was major progress in computing, networking, and storage.
Disk drives got a lot faster, networking got a lot faster, processor units.
In GPUs a little bit, but in GPUs it's continued to go off to the moon
as Moore's Law has continued in more specialized processor chips.
Through that period, as open standards began to emerge, we started thinking about
how we could create technologies that would help better take advantage
of the innovation in the hardware and the hardware layer.
That has led us in this current era to think about re-architecting all of our systems
on interoperable standards that will enable us to get much better performance
and efficiency across a heterogeneous application stack that's doing a mixture
of ML, feature engineering, machine learning training, and AI inference.
We've had this emergence of new standards for composability, which I will talk about.
We're seeing simultaneously an emergence of new systems which are built to be
composable from the ground up, as well as retrofitting existing pieces
of systems with new components which are created with this new composable mindset.
Back to the paper, we foresee that for composability it's going to cause
another major disruption to how data management systems are designed.
We foresee that monolithic systems will become obsolete and give space
for new ideas.
I was working with the Hadoop ecosystem at the time.
I was trying to socialize these ideas with the data science community.
This was my first talk at the New York R Conference in 2015.
There wasn't a lot of cross-pollination between the data science world
and the big data world.
These were ideas from the big data world that we were trying to socialize
in the data science community.
The core idea of this paper is that we've made all of this progress
in big data systems with impressive scalability, but few of the performance
benchmarks evaluate their absolute.
They look just at scalability but without evaluating their absolute performance.
In this paper, they introduce a metric called cost.
It's the configuration that outperforms a single thread to try to measure
the amount of overhead that is introduced into a distributed system
by enabling it to scale.
Over the last several years, we've focused work in several key areas.
Firstly, in protocols, mainly Apache Aero and things related to Apache Aero.
We have a new collection of modular engines which are helping accelerate
systems, either through new systems which are based on those engines
or retrofitted.
There's a lot of other stuff that isn't in this picture,
in distributed computing, ETL modeling, workflow and infrastructure orchestration.
I'm sure there's a lot of talks at this conference
and a lot of involvement in this was helping create the Apache Aero project.
We realized in the mid-2010s that we needed to create a cross-language
fast memory format which could be used for fast in-memory computing
as well as fast data interchange across disparate systems.
We started imagining what if we had this shared data science run time,
a set of libraries and computational systems that we could use interchangeably
across programming languages.
It didn't matter which language front-end you're using, what programming language.
At the same time, in the database world,
there was also a gnashing of teeth around this problem
of how inefficient it is to import and export data from databases.
If you're using just a single database, single data warehouse,
you can't get a thick milkshake through a straw that's too small
if you've ever had that experience.
This was in 2017, right around the same time that we were starting Aero.
What we've done is create technologies to provide an open standard
for Aero native APIs for interacting with databases
using a standard wire protocol out of the box
rather than using a proprietary or system-specific wire protocol
that has to be serialized when you're getting data out.
Our hope is that, firstly, with existing systems,
but at the same time they can also build support
for the new wire protocol directly into the database.
They have their legacy protocol as well as the new open standard protocol,
and that yields significantly better performance.
Around the same time, you might have recognized those fellows,
interoperable data format, these protocols,
that work well with these new standards and data formats.
DuckDB is one example of now a very successful project,
which is putting a super-fast columnar analytical database
into a browser pretty much anywhere that can run C++ code or WASM.
If we think about the architecture of what new composable systems look like,
on the bottom tier we have...
This is a diagram from the paper.
We have a modular execution engine,
a runtime which provides for distributed computing and coordination.
That could be Spark, that could be Ray,
or another distributed runtime that makes use of one of these modular engines
like DuckDB or Velox or another.
We create optimized query plans
which are handed off into our distributed runtime.
There are now several modular execution engines
written in different programming languages
such as the now Apache Data Fusion meetup.
It's a Rust-based modular query engine.
It has a query optimizer on the front end as well,
but can also be just as an execution engine in Rust.
It's a native distributed execution engine in C++
that initially is targeting NVIDIA GPUs.
One of the things that we've developed in this community
to make connecting these engines to the language front end easier
is to have an intermediate representation for queries
The idea is that your language front end,
whether that's a DataFrame API or a SQL API,
we translate that into a substrate plan
and we can optimize that substrate plan
and then the execution engine can take that plan
and turn that into a physical execution plan
that is sent off to the cluster to be executed.
We also retrofit existing popular query engines
with these new modular accelerators.
Three of them that you can get access to
or you can look at or contribute to right now.
One is Prestissimo, which is retrofitting PrestoDB,
I should clarify, not Trino, with Velox.
There's Comet, which has been just donated
into the DataFusion project from Apple,
which is accelerating Spark with DataFusion.
There's also Apache Gluten, part of the Apache Incubator,
which is accelerating Spark with Velox.
Eventually we'll have DataFusion and Presto
and probably every combination of modular accelerators
in our query engine projects.
All of this begins to pose the question of
why as a user should I be locked into using
a particular full-stack query engine like Spark or Presto?
The cost, performance, and latency
of these different systems varies greatly.
We can do a lot with DuckDB.
But when you have an actual big problem
that's too big for DuckDB,
you want to be able to transition gracefully
to using that larger scalable execution engine.
Of course, last year at Data Council
we had Jordan Tagani on the stage in a duck costume
talking about how big data is dead.
Big data still is big data. Big data does still exist.
I believe that we should be able to gracefully transition
from working at the single machine,
could be a large single machine, but the small scale
to a large scalable data processing engine
without as much pain and suffering.
This isn't that easy, though, in part because
it advertises just standard SQL.
Because SQL dialects, while SQL is a standard,
in practice SQL dialects are non-portable
and they feature a wide spectrum of different features.
There's a tool like SQLGLOT, which is amazing,
which helps with transpiling and converting from one SQL dialect
to another, but this does create a problem.
You have to solve this problem because if you have a mountain
of existing SQL queries and you want to migrate them
to use a different data processing engine,
you have to rewrite all those queries and deal with all the quirky edge cases
of type coalescing, conversion, and whatnot.
Knowing which engine to use in every scenario is non-trivial
and may not always be obvious.
A few years ago in CIDR 2021,
folks at Microsoft approached this problem from the standpoint
of the Azure data platform to say,
could we create a unified API for interacting with all these different database engines
that we have available in the Azure platform and intelligently choose
which one to use based on the type of workload,
like how big the data set is, what statistics we have about the data,
performance, good total cost of ownership for the query.
They described a research project that they did called Magpie
where they created a pandas-like data frame API.
They have a compiler and optimizer at the middle.
They have a common data layer, which is based on Arrow,
that provides for a distributed data fabric to coordinate
these different execution engines within the Azure platform.
These are the different backends that are available in Azure.
I love this idea and I would really like to help it become
more mainstream and a reality for data engineers everywhere.
A project that I've been involved in,
I started about nine, almost 10 years ago,
and that we've been putting a lot of resources into is the IBIS project in Python,
which had been an effort to harmonize the best features of modern SQL
with Python's fluent data frame APIs.
We also wanted in IBIS to fix shortcomings in the pandas API
and make things that are hard to do with pandas a lot easier to do with IBIS,
so we made a deliberate choice to depart from the pandas API.
We wanted to make it easy to build complex,
large analytical SQL queries by using the benefits of a modern
programming language, functions and parameters and things like that,
things that don't exist in SQL.
Over the years, we've been really focused on portability and compatibility
across a wide spectrum of engines who now support over 20 backends
to provide a unified API that could be the basis
of building a multi-engine data stack.
IBIS code, this produces a pretty complex SQL query
and everything is based on pipe-like
sequences of methods that compose with each other
to create complex expressions.
One of the workflows that we hear a lot of pain points about
and people wanting to work in this ecosystem
and to create a composable data stack is how to go from
dev to prod.
Nobody wants to burn a ton of snowflake credits while they're developing
and the ideal scenario would be to be able to develop,
build your model, do all of your development locally on your laptop
with DuckDB and whenever you're ready to go into prod
in Spark SQL or BigQuery or Snowflake,
then it's about as easy as flipping the switch.
Run this workflow but in Snowflake and to not have to rewrite all of your queries.
That's one of the key things that we're trying to facilitate
in this project.
One of the reasons why this is so important is because
at truly large-scale workloads, this is benchmarks that were just published
by Voltron Data last week at GTC.
We showed that when you have a specialized cluster of GPUs,
so this is comparing Spark SQL and EMR
compared with a 80-node, 80-GPU on-prem cluster
with Finaband and NVLink and all the bells and whistles.
If you have a truly large-scale workload at 10 terabyte and up
and you're willing to make an investment in hardware or to rent hardware
to work at that scale, you can get some truly amazing performance
with the hardware that's available today.
We want to facilitate taking advantage of hardware acceleration
in really large-scale workloads.
It's a pain to work at small-scale, but whenever you're working
at very large-scale queries, you have to work in a completely different way.
That's very painful for the user.
If you're a large company and you have a lot of workloads
that are going into your GPU cluster,
which you want to reserve only for your large-scale workloads,
you don't want to clog with a bunch of small-scale queries.
I see all of these technologies building up
to make that possible.
I really aspire to help us
create the reality of a multi-engine, multi-engine data stack
to have execution engines available that are tailored for different data scales
so that when you're below a terabyte, you can use DuckDB, Data Fusion,
things that run on your laptop,
and that those larger scales that you can transition to using Spark
or more specialized tools at a much larger scale,
a lot more gracefully and for you as a user,
a lot more productivity.
I'm pretty excited about these kind of new portable language
front-end projects.
I didn't have time to talk about it in this talk,
but something really exciting is a whole new programming language
for analytical queries that I encourage you to check out.
Another project, I think it's called PRQL,
Pipeline Relational Query Language,
another effort to build a better SQL.
Particularly as these execution components standardize,
I think a lot of the work in data systems
is making it easier to orchestrate systems,
write queries, execute them portably across these different environments.
Now, almost eight years into Arrow,
almost nine years since we started conceiving and putting together the project,
it's great that Arrow is becoming the de facto standard
for how we build APIs and how we connect systems together.
I think that bodes well for even better performance
So with that, I'm sure you're all hungry, ready for lunch,
but I think I have time for a few questions,
and I appreciate your attention. Thanks.